[22616] `Easy Mode` enhancement and tutorial docs (#233)
eProsima/vulcanexus: docs/rst/enhancements/easy_mode/easy_mode.rst

.. _easy_mode:

Easy Mode
=========

The new ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode`` aims to simplify, enhance and optimize the deployment of any ROS 2 application reinforcing the overall out-of-the-box user experience.
Moreover, it claims to be the default discovery behavior within :ref:`Vulcanexus <vulcanexus_introduction>`.
This section reveals its significance, operating mode and impact.

Quick Overview
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode`` is a builtin discovery mode that simplifies to the most the deployment of ROS 2 applications with the use of `Discovery Server <https://eprosima-discovery-server.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_.

Author: I think that the first part makes more sense as it was, chaning the link

To enable this feature the user only needs to set the environment variable ``EASY_MODE=<ip>``.
This ``<ip>`` can be either the IP address of the current host or the ``<ip>`` of an external host in the same LAN acting as the central point of discovery (``master``).
A new discovery server will be spawned in background in the domain specified by the ``ROS_DOMAIN_ID`` environment variable.
The following diagram illustrates the concept:

.. image:: ../../figures/enhancements/easy_mode/easy_mode_quick_intro.png
    :align: center
    :width: 55%

The advantages of the ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode`` can be explored in :ref:`easy_mode_benefits`.

Feature Insights
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This sub-section provides a detailed explanation of the ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode``.

Motivation
----------

ROS 2 users often expect ROS 2 applications to run out-of-the-box without caring about middleware configuration or network setup.

> As a result, experience has revealed that the default `DDS Simple discovery mechanism <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/discovery/discovery.html>`_ with multicast is not always the best choice for the majority of use cases.

Author: Yeah I think it makes sense to the specific

However, `eProsima's Discovery Server <https://eprosima-discovery-server.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ mechanism effectively removes the need for multicast discovery traffic and presents a flexible solution for different network topologies.

.. list-table::
   :width: 100%
   :class: borderless

   * - .. image:: ../../figures/enhancements/easy_mode/simple_discovery_multiple_hosts.png
          :width: 100%

     - .. image:: ../../figures/enhancements/easy_mode/easy_mode_multiple_hosts.png
          :width: 100%

This method proposes a centralized discovery approach by means of a Discovery Server entity.
`Investigation and comparison of both methods <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/2.14.x/fastdds/ros2/discovery_server/ros2_discovery_server.html#discovery-server-v2>`_ have shown that the number of discovery packets is drastically reduced and the system scalability improves when using the Discovery Server.
The previous image shows how Discovery Server simplifies the discovery graph compared with the default DDS Simple discovery for a localhost deployment of four ROS 2 nodes.

Background
----------

*Vulcanexus* uses :ref:`Fast DDS as middleware <vulcanexus_middleware>`.

> DDS entities require those to have information about each other to communicate.

Author: Good catch it seems it was left from a previous sentence

* Requires multicast capabilities that may not work reliably in some scenarios, e.g. WiFi.

The *Fast DDS Discovery Server* offers a Client-Server framework that enables nodes to connect through an intermediary server.
Each node acts as a discovery client, transmitting its information to one or more discovery servers and obtaining discovery data from them.
This approach minimizes network traffic associated with discovery and eliminates the need for multicast functionality.

Another relevant concept in ROS 2 is the `ROS_DOMAIN_ID <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Concepts/Intermediate/About-Domain-ID.html>`_.
The *ROS_DOMAIN_ID* is a unique identifier that allows multiple ROS 2 applications to run on the same network without interfering with each other.
It is a way of isolating different ROS 2 application groups that do not need to communicate with each other.
Internally, it is directly related to the DDS Domain ID, which, in turn, selects different network port ranges for each domain.
See the `ROS 2 documentation <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Concepts/Intermediate/About-Domain-ID.html>`_ for further explanation.

Understanding Easy Mode
-----------------------

> The new ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode`` can be enabled by simply setting the already known environment variable ``EASY_MODE`` to an IP (later explained).

Author: Uf that was referencing the old ROS_DISOCVERY_SERVER, good catch

.. _easy_mode:

Easy Mode
=========

The new ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode`` aims to simplify, enhance and optimize the deployment of any ROS 2 application reinforcing the overall out-of-the-box user experience.

> Moreover, it claims to be the default discovery behavior within :ref:`Vulcanexus <vulcanexus_introduction>`.

Reviewer: Remove this sentence.

This section reveals its significance, operating mode and impact.

Quick Overview
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode`` is a builtin discovery mode that simplifies to the most the deployment of ROS 2 applications with the use of `Discovery Server <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/discovery/discovery_server.html>`_.
To enable this feature the user only needs to set the environment variable ``EASY_MODE=<ip>``.
This ``<ip>`` can be either the IP address of the current host or the ``<ip>`` of an external host in the same LAN acting as the central point of discovery (``master``).

> A new discovery server will be spawned in background in the domain specified by the ``ROS_DOMAIN_ID`` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By running a ROS 2 node with this environment variable, a new discovery server will be spawned in background.
```

The following diagram illustrates the concept:

> .. image:: ../../figures/enhancements/easy_mode/easy_mode_quick_intro.png

Reviewer: I'm missing a legend with the meaning of the arrows (discovery and user data). I'd also remove the Domain from the image as may be confusing for ROS 2 users as they are not used to using domains.

    :align: center
    :width: 55%

The advantages of the ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode`` can be explored in the next section.

.. _easy_mode_benefits:

Benefits
^^^^^^^^

The use of ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode`` brings the following benefits:

* **Simplicity**: The user does not need to worry about configuring the middleware, enhancing the out-of-the-box experience.
  The user easily manages connections between domains and hosts only when needed.
* **Scalability**: The number of discovery packets is drastically reduced, and the system scalability improves.
* **Reliability**: The new discovery mode is more reliable than Simple discovery with multicast, especially in WiFi scenarios, as it uses peer to peer TCP.

Feature Insights
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This sub-section provides a detailed explanation of the ``Vulcanexus Easy Mode``.

Motivation
----------

> ROS 2 users often expect ROS 2 applications to run out-of-the-box without caring about middleware configuration or network setup.
> As a result, experience has revealed that the default `DDS Simple discovery mechanism <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/discovery/simple.html#simple-discovery-settings>`_ with multicast is not always the best choice for the majority of use cases.
> However, `eProsima's Discovery Server <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/discovery/discovery_server.html>`_ mechanism effectively removes the need for multicast discovery traffic and presents a flexible solution for different network topologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ROS 2 users frequently prefer ROS 2 applications to function seamlessly without requiring extensive middleware configuration or network setup. 
However, practical experience suggests that the default `DDS Simple discovery mechanism <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/discovery/simple.html#simple-discovery-settings>`_ using multicast may not be the most suitable option for many use cases. 
In contrast, `eProsima's Discovery Server <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/discovery/discovery_server.html>`_ mechanism offers an alternative by eliminating the need for multicast discovery traffic and providing a flexible solution adaptable to various network topologies.
```

> .. list-table::

Reviewer: Move this after the next paragraph to have the explanation first. And I'd remove the domains from here. The first time you mention or explain domain is in the next section so I prefer to leave that for more advanced users

   :width: 100%
   :class: borderless

   * - .. image:: ../../figures/enhancements/easy_mode/simple_discovery_multiple_hosts.png
          :width: 100%

     - .. image:: ../../figures/enhancements/easy_mode/easy_mode_multiple_hosts.png
          :width: 100%

This method proposes a centralized discovery approach by means of a Discovery Server entity.
`Investigation and comparison of both methods <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/2.14.x/fastdds/ros2/discovery_server/ros2_discovery_server.html#discovery-server-v2>`_ have shown that the number of discovery packets is drastically reduced and the system scalability improves when using the Discovery Server.

> The previous image shows how Discovery Server simplifies the discovery graph compared with the default DDS Simple discovery for a localhost deployment of four ROS 2 nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following image shows how Discovery Server simplifies the discovery graph compared with the default DDS Simple discovery for a localhost deployment of four ROS 2 nodes.
```

When the first ROS 2 node is launched, it will automatically spawn a Discovery Server instance in the given domain, i.e., the one specified in the ``ROS_DOMAIN_ID`` (0 by default) and make the ROS 2 node a client pointing to it.
If a Discovery Server is already running in the domain, the node will simply connect to it as a client, and no additional servers will be spawned.
Therefore, only one Discovery Server will be present in each domain.
The following diagram illustrates this concept:

.. image:: ../../figures/enhancements/easy_mode/multiple_ds_domain.png
    :align: center
    :width: 45%

Servers connection
------------------

A direct consequence of the ``Easy Mode`` is that the discovery scope of every ROS 2 node is determined by the value set in the ``<ip>`` parameter.
By setting this value to the IP of a remote host, nodes can interconnect across hosts, as long as they share the same domain.
However, if a local IP is selected, nodes will not try to discover other entities in different hosts.
It is important to clarify that setting a local IP does not prevent your nodes from being discovered by other hosts.

> They can be discovered by any other host setting the ``EASY_MODE`` variable to your local IP.```

Reviewer 2: There was a typo in my latest suggestion, sorry
```suggestion
They can be discovered by any other host setting the ``EASY_MODE`` variable to your local IP.
```
